MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session (#3882)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3882-login-token-request.md

# MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session

In [MSC3906](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3906) a proposal is made to allow a user to login
on a new device using an existing device by means of scanning a QR code.

In order to support the above proposal a mechanism is needed where by the new device can obtain a new access token that
it can use with the Client-Server API.

It is proposed that the current `m.login.token` mechanism is extended to allow the issuance of a login token by an
existing client session.

## Proposal

Add a new POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a single-use, time-limited `m.login.token` token:

`POST /_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token`

> The client should send an empty JSON body for the `POST` request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client should send an empty JSON object for the body of the `POST` request (apart from
the `auth` property used in user-interactive authentication).
```

to configure a low limit ("low" relative to other enforced limits). For example, a rate of once per minute could be appropriate.

If a homeserver admin deems that they have a suitable alternative to UIA in place, they can make use of
["dummy auth"](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#dummy-auth) and have the homeserver respond with a response similar to:

```http
HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
Content-Type: application/json
```

```json
{
  "flows": [
    {
      "stages": ["m.login.dummy"]
    }
  ],
  "params": {},
  "session": "xxxxxx"
}
```

The client can then complete UIA without requiring action from the user by sending the following JSON request body:

```http
POST /_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json
```

```json
{
  "auth": {
    "type": "m.login.dummy",
    "session": "xxxxxx"
  }
}
```

## Unstable prefix

While this feature is in development the new endpoint should be exposed using the following unstable prefix:

- `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/get_token`

Additionally, the feature is to be advertised as unstable feature in the `GET /_matrix/client/versions` response, with

> the key `org.matrix.msc3882.r1` set to `true`. (The `r1` in the feature name is used to indicate that the server implements the first revision of this proposal)

Reviewer 2: My understanding is that this is needed for [MSC3906](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3906/files#diff-89279ef5721f17a005de8529325f6b7ef2aecec72dea442572f844f769a54304R99) to check whether it can go ahead with the login.  However, I'm not sure if this (or a spec version check after this gets released in the spec) is sufficient, as a server/admin may want to disable the feature for certain users, or disable the feature entirely.  So even though the server may implement the feature, it may not be available to the users.  We could say that servers are not allowed to disable the feature, but that sounds overly restrictive. Or we could say that MSC3906 will assume that if the server implements the feature, then the user can use it and the login will just fail if it can't, but I'd prefer to avoid having misleading UI if possible.

My first thought was to add a field to `GET /login` to indicate the availability of the feature, but we want the request to be authenticated because the feature might be enabled/disabled on a per-user basis. Maybe the best place to put it is in [Capabilities negotiation](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/#capabilities-negotiation).

Reviewer: yes, this is the sort of thing that `GET /capabilities` is intended to support.

Author: Okay, I've re-worked the proposal to make it an optional capability that is discoverable via `GET /capabilities`.

@uhoreg @richvdh I wasn't sure what to call it exactly - please can you let me know if the proposed `m.get_logintoken` is suitable before I create PRs for the updated implementations?

Reviewer: `m.get_logintoken` sgtm. I think we need to mention the `org.matrix.msc3882.get_logintoken` unstable capability too, in the "unstable prefix" section.

Author: However, whilst re-working the iOS and Android implementation I've realised that a signed-out client needs a way to know whether a Homeserver *might* support the capability.

This is because in the current UX if a client is not yet logged in it will only show the "Sign in with QR code" button if the server indicates support.

So, I need an unauthenticated way for a client to check the capability. Should this be somewhere in `/versions` or in the `/.well-known/matrix/client`? or somewhere else?

Reviewer: gah, I think it has to be in `/versions`.

Author: @uhoreg I had forgotten that both check them, not just the logged in client.

Author: I'm not sure what is the best option:

1. `GET /versions`

The doesn't appear to be an existing way to slot this in. So perhaps add a top-level `features` field something like:

```json
{
  "features": {
    "m.login.get_logintoken": true,
  },
  "unstable_features": {
    "org.example.my_feature": true
  },
  "versions": [
    "r0.0.1",
    "v1.1"
  ]
}
```

2. `GET /login`

Define a "special" (similar to the existing `m.auth.dummy`) auth type that is returned as a possible login flow:

```json
{
  "flows": [
    {
      "type": "m.login.get_logintoken"
    }
  ]
}
```

Option (1) feels slightly cleaner to me albeit adding a new section to the versions response. Which way do you think I should go?

Reviewer 2: I don't really have a strong preference either way.  The first option has the advantage that it can be used by other features in the future.  Though I'm not sure how useful it would actually be.

Just to throw another option into the mix, we can also modify `GET /login` in a different way:  since we already know that we'll have an `m.login.token` item in the `flows`, we can add an extra field to that part, something like

```json
{
  "flow": [
    {
      "type": "m.login.token",
      "get_login_token": true
    }
  ]
}
```

But again, I don't have a strong preference either way.

Reviewer: To be clear, my understanding is that the feature may be:
 1. unavailable to *any* user on the homeserver, or
 2. available for some users but not others.

An *authenticated* client can ask "is this feature available for my user" via `/capabilities`, but we also have a need for an *unauthenticated* client to ask "is this feature available for any user", and we are discussing how best to expose that.

This is all setting aside any "unstable" feature flags, which add complexity and we can figure out afterwards.

Is that correct?

---

> Option (1) feels slightly cleaner to me albeit adding a new section to the versions response. Which way do you think I should go?

I am reluctant that we extend `/versions` in this way - `/versions` is really about "how recent is my homeserver implementation". For me, it feels a much better fit for `GET /login`.

@uhoreg:

> ```json
> {
>   "flow": [
>     {
>       "type": "m.login.token",
>       "get_login_token": true
>     }
>   ]
> }
> ```

Yes, I like this suggestion.

Reviewer 2: > To be clear, my understanding is that the feature may be:
> 
>     1. unavailable to _any_ user on the homeserver, or
> 
>     2. available for some users but not others.

In theory, yes, though I don't know if # 2 will be a common-enough situation.  My initial thought was that if only the already-logged-in user was checking the capability, we might as well have the flexibility of allowing it to be selectively enabled.  But given that we have to expose the feature request to unauthenticated users, it would mean putting the feature query on two different endpoints, which may be more trouble than it's worth.  So unless someone else feels strongly about # 2, I'm fine, personally, to just have the unauthenticated query.

Author: >To be clear, my understanding is that the feature may be:
>
> - unavailable to any user on the homeserver, or
> - available for some users but not others.
>
> An authenticated client can ask "is this feature available for my user" via /capabilities, but we also have a need for an unauthenticated client to ask "is this feature available for any user", and we are discussing how best to expose that.
>
> This is all setting aside any "unstable" feature flags, which add complexity and we can figure out afterwards.
>
> Is that correct?

@richvdh Yes, this is correct.

I have updated the proposal to use `GET /login` for the unauthenticated client and `GET /capabilities` for the definitive answer for the authenticated client.

It comes out that no feature flag is needed. However, there are unstable versions of the new fields.

existing client session.

## Proposal

### New API endpoint POST /login/get_token

Add a new optional POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a single-use, time-limited `m.login.token` token:

`POST /_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token`

The client should send an empty JSON object for the body of the `POST` request (apart from
the `auth` property used in user-interactive authentication).

As detailed in the security selection below, this new endpoint should be protected by user interactive authentication
(UIA) as detailed in the existing
["User-interactive API in the REST API"](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.5/client-server-api/#user-interactive-api-in-the-rest-api)
section of the spec.

Once UIA has been completed a `200` response with JSON body is returned. The body contains the following fields:

- `login_token` - required, the token to use with `m.login.token`
- `expires_in_ms` - required, how long until the token expires in milliseconds

An example response is as follows:

```http
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
```

```json
{
    "login_token": "<login token>",

>     "expires_in_ms": 120000

Reviewer 3: Is there any reason to make this `expires_in_ms` vs. `expires_ts`, i.e. handing the client the ms timestamp at which the token expires? I just wonder whether network latency could cause the client to compute a timestamp for when the token expires that's different enough than what the server has.

Author: The reason for `expires_in_ms` being proposed is that it is consistent with the other parts of authentication in the client-server API.

Reviewer 3: That's a good point. Plus while network latency could be a factor, it's less likely than the client and server having slightly different clock values - which a relative value such as `expires_in_ms` does defend against.

It is proposed that the unauthenticated client can determine if the new API endpoint *may* be available
as part of the existing
[`GET /_matrix/client/v3/login`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3login)
API endpoint.

As the `m.login.token` mechanism is used to redeem the login token, the client can first determine if the
`m.login.token` is advertised as a flow in the `GET /_matrix/client/v3/login` response. Then it can check a
new boolean field `get_login_token` to determine if the capability *may* be available.

An example of the proposed `GET /_matrix/client/v3/login` response is:

```json
{
  "flow": [
    {
      "type": "m.login.token",
      "get_login_token": true
    }
  ]
}
```

In this case the mechanism could be available and so the client could prompt the user to try using it.

#### Scenario 2: The user wishes to use an already signed in Matrix client to sign in another client

The client is already authenticated. The client can determine whether it is able and allowed to sign in
another client by checking the
[capabilities](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#capabilities-negotiation)
advertised by the homeserver.

> Where the client is authenticated the client can determine whether the new API endpoint is available

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The unauthenticated client can also determine whether the new API endpoint is available
```

via the [capability negotiation](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#capabilities-negotiation)
mechanism.

The homeserver can then decide on a per user basis if the capability is available or not. For example,
it could implement a policy based on some risk criteria around the user’s account, session, or device.

A new capability `m.get_login_token` is proposed. This capability has a single boolean flag, `enabled`, to
denote whether the `/login/get_token` API is available or not.

An example of the capability API’s response for this capability is:

```json
{
  "capabilities": {
    "m.get_login_token": {
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: MSC structure nit: I would define the `/capabilties` response addition here first, then the use cases afterwards. Otherwise I was reading the beginning of this section wondering what capability the clients would use.

3. The homeserver should enforce rate-limiting in accordance with the existing
[spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#rate-limiting). It may be appropriate for the homeserver admin to
to configure a low limit ("low" relative to other enforced limits). For example, a rate of once per minute could be appropriate.

n.b. A homeserver admin may deem that they have suitable protections in place and offer the endpoint without UIA auth as described
in the existing spec:

> A request to an endpoint that uses User-Interactive Authentication never succeeds without auth. Homeservers may allow requests
> that don’t require auth by offering a stage with only the m.login.dummy auth type, but they must still give a 401 response to
> requests with no auth data.

## Unstable prefix

While this feature is in development the following unstable prefixes should be used:

- API endpoint `/_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token` => `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/get_token`
- capability `m.get_login_token` => `org.matrix.msc3882.get_login_token`
- login flow field `get_login_token` => `org.matrix.msc3882.get_login_token`

> For reference - an earlier revision of this proposal used an unstable prefix of
> `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/token` with an unstable feature advertised 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For reference - an earlier revision of this proposal used an unstable endpoint of
`/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/token` with an unstable feature advertised 
```

# MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session

todo

## Proposal

Add a new POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a time limited `m.login.token` token:

`POST /login/token`

```json
{
    "login_token": "<login token>",
    "expires_in": 3600
}
```

This new endpoint MAY be protected by user interactive authentication.

This token can then be used as per the existing Login spec of the Client-Server API as follows:

`POST /login`

```json
{
  "type": "m.login.token",
  "token": "<login token>"
}
```

## Potential issues

todo

## Alternatives

> If Matrix was already using OIDC as per [MSC3861](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3861) then we could use the device authorization grant flow which allows for a new device to be signed in using an existing device.

Reviewer 2: Please wrap your lines to ~80 or ~120 characters

# MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session

In [MSC3906](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3906) a proposal is made to allow a user to login on a new device using an existing device by means of scanning a
QR code.

In order to support the above proposal a mechanism is needed where by the new device can obtain a new access token that it can use with the Client-Server API.

It is proposed that the current `m.login.token` mechanism is extended to allow the issuance of a login token by an existing client session.

## Proposal

Add a new POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a time limited `m.login.token` token:

`POST /login/token`

```json
{
    "login_token": "<login token>",

>     "expires_in": 3600

Reviewer 4: The login needs to be verified by checking some digits right?

>     "expires_in": 3600

Author: Yes, I would expect the token to be valid for a shorter time period and I will incorporate this.

The login token can be used to sign in without any further checks. Any protections (such as UIA) should happen before this point.

>     "expires_in": 3600

Reviewer 4: OK, since we [check](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/develop/synapse/storage/databases/main/registration.py#L1875-L1876) for token reuse we have a good posture against shoulder-scanning where someone tries to sneak behind you and login.

}
```

> This new endpoint MAY be protected by user interactive authentication.

Reviewer 4: Should it be default?

Author: Having had some other discussions in recent weeks on this I concur with you that it should be the default. I will update to reflect this.

# MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session

In [MSC3906](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3906) a proposal is made to allow a user to login
on a new device using an existing device by means of scanning a QR code.

In order to support the above proposal a mechanism is needed where by the new device can obtain a new access token that
it can use with the Client-Server API.

It is proposed that the current `m.login.token` mechanism is extended to allow the issuance of a login token by an
existing client session.

## Proposal

Add a new POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a time limited `m.login.token` token:

`POST /login/token`

```json
{
    "login_token": "<login token>",
    "expires_in": 120
}
```

This new endpoint should be protected by user interactive authentication (UIA). However the the homeserver admin may

> choose to disable UIA if they deem suitable alternative protections are in place.

Reviewer 5: In addition to regular authentication? Should the endpoint be rate limited?

Author: I had imagined that it would fall under the default Client Server API [rate-limiting](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#rate-limiting) but I will call this out explicitly.

The values returned are:

- `login_token` - required, the token to use with `m.login.token`

> - `expires_in` - required, the expiry time for the token in seconds

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `expires_in` - required, how long until the token expires in seconds
```

to differentiate from a timestamp that uses seconds instead of milliseconds

> This token can then be used as per the existing Login spec of the Client-Server API as follows:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This token can then be used as per the existing [Login spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#login) as follows:
```

# MSC3882: Allow an existing session to sign in a new session

In [MSC3906](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3906) a proposal is made to allow a user to login
on a new device using an existing device by means of scanning a QR code.

In order to support the above proposal a mechanism is needed where by the new device can obtain a new access token that
it can use with the Client-Server API.

It is proposed that the current `m.login.token` mechanism is extended to allow the issuance of a login token by an
existing client session.

## Proposal

Add a new POST endpoint to the Client-Server API that issues a time limited `m.login.token` token:

> `POST /login/token`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`POST /_matrix/client/v1/login/token`
```

Reviewer: Maybe a bit of a bikeshed issue, but I'm unconvinced this is the clearest name. 

`.../login/token` gives me the impression that we are logging in using a token (ie, the functionality currently offered by `/login` with `type: m.login.token`). Would it be better to call it `.../login/get_token`?

Author: I've made it `POST /_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token` in the latest iteration.

Should it definitely be on `/_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token` not `/_matrix/client/v3/login/get_token` which would be consistent with the other existing `/_matrix/client/v3/login*` endpoints?

Reviewer: > Should it definitely be on `/_matrix/client/v1/login/get_token` not `/_matrix/client/v3/login/get_token` which would be consistent with the other existing `/_matrix/client/v3/login*` endpoints?

I think so. I'm sure the rest of the SCT will tell me I'm wrong during calls for FCP if not!

Reviewer 2: That's my understanding.  Each endpoint has its own version number.  All the r0 endpoints got migrated to v3 due to reasons, but new endpoints get to start from v1.

```json
{
    "login_token": "<login token>",
    "expires_in": 120
}

> ```

Reviewer: is this the response or the request? As currently set out, it looks like the request, but on re-reading I think it might be the response?

Author: I've clarified this in the latest revision.

This new endpoint should be protected by user interactive authentication (UIA). However the the homeserver admin may

> choose to disable UIA if they deem suitable alternative protections are in place.

Reviewer: as per msc3967: define "disable UIA" please.

Author: I have hopefully sufficiently clarified this in the latest revision?

- `expires_in` - required, how long until the token expires in seconds

This token can then be used as per the existing [Login spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.6/client-server-api/#login) as follows:

`POST /login`

```json
{
  "type": "m.login.token",
  "token": "<login token>"
}
```

## Potential issues

None identified.

## Alternatives

If Matrix was already using OIDC as per [MSC3861](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3861) then we
could use the device authorization grant flow which allows for a new device to be signed in using an existing device.

## Security considerations

A malicious client could use the mechanism to spawn more than one session. For this reason the endpoint should by default
be placed behind user interactive authentication.

## Unstable prefix

While this feature is in development the new endpoint should be exposed using the following unstable prefix:

- `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/token`

Additionally, the feature is to be advertised as unstable feature in the `GET /_matrix/client/versions`
response, with the key `org.matrix.msc3882` set to `true`. So, the response could look then as

> following:

Reviewer 2: FWIW, Rich's concern here is different from the issue that I brought up.  His concern is how to detect the presence of the feature between the acceptance of this MSC and the spec version being fully implemented.  My issue is about whether or not admins/servers can selectively disable the feature for users.  I'll start a new thread for my concern.

> following:

Reviewer: For more context on my concern: jump-to-date is currently suffering from the exact failure mode I outlined: https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15283.

Though also, [a discussion thread on that PR](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/15283#discussion_r1142071333) appears to be heading in the direction of: "let's avoid using stable feature flags".

So I'm not quite sure what to do here. Probably best to leave it as-is for now at least.

> following:

Author: @richvdh I think the revised proposal of using a capability addresses your concerns about rollout. The sequence could be:

1. Pre-FCP completed (i.e. now): clients check for the `org.matrix.msc3882.get_logintoken` capability (and optionally the unstable `org.matrix.msc3882` feature from the revision 0 of this MSC)
2. Once FCP is complete:
  - server support for feature can move to stable `m.get_logintoken` prefix
  - clients can check for `m.get_logintoken` capability and fall back to pre-FCP checks from (1)
3. Once the feature is in a release of the spec (say `1.8`):
  - if a client is talking to a server that supports `1.8` then it knows it only needs to check the stable `m.get_logintoken` capability
  - if a client is talking to an earlier server then it could follow the (2) FCP complete logic
4. At a future point that clients think that `1.8` is supported widely enough they can stop implementing (2) and only use the stable `m.get_logintoken` capability

- `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/get_token`

The capability should use the unstable prefix:

- `org.matrix.msc3882.get_logintoken`

For reference - an earlier revision of this proposal used an unstable prefix of

> `/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/token` with an unstable feature advertised as `org.matrix.msc3882`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc3882/login/token` with an unstable feature advertised 
in the response to `GET /_matrix/client/versions` as `org.matrix.msc3882`
```
